# OS Hardening

## Compiler Options

### Stack Cookies / Stack Canaries

Stack cookies/canaries are used to protect from Stack Smashing. Stack canaries are named for their analogy to a canary in a coal mine, and are used to detect a stack buffer overflow before execution of malicious code can occur.

#### Enabling Stack Canaries / Cookies in QCC[GCC]

Stack canaries can be generated by enabling the compiler options starting with *-fstack-protector-*. The recommendation is to use -fstack-protector-all as it adds stack protection to all functions regardless of their vulnerability.

In CMake we could enable stack canaries by setting the *CMAKE_C_FLAGS_INIT* flags:
> set (CMAKE_C_FLAGS_INIT -fstack-protector-all)

Warnings about programs having potential stack smashing can be enabled during compilation by the compiler option *-Wstack-protector*.

In CMake the same can be achieved by setting the *CMAKE_C_FLAGS_INIT* flags:
> set (CMAKE_C_FLAGS_INIT -Wstack-protector)

### Non Executable Stack

GCC Allows users to overide the execute stack marking in binaries and libraries by passing a linker option *noexecstack*.
There is also a linux utility called *execstack* which can be used to mark executables as no execution from stack

#### Marking Binaries and Libraries as Non Executable in QCC[GCC]

We shall override the binaries to be marked as non exectuable in stack with the following linker option: *-Wl,-z,noexecstack*

In CMake this can be achieved by:
> add_link_options("LINKER : SHELL : -z noexecstack")

Warnings about programs having trampolines can be enabled during build by the compiler option *-Wtrampolines*.

In CMake the same can be achieved by:
> set (CMAKE_C_FLAGS_INIT -Wtrampolines)

### Format String Errors

To illustrate this vulnerability, consider the following code sample and an attacker that controls str. By carefully constructing the string that's passed in, an attacker could easily cause the program to crash. If an attacker has access to the output of the call with the format string vulnerability, the attacker could also easily bypass defenses such as Address Space Layout Randomization (ASLR), No eXecute (NX), and stack cookies.

>void foo(char* str) {
>printf(str);
>}

#### Enabling Format String Errors

You can resolve format string vulnerabilities as errors by using the following options in the command line compiler: *-Wformat -Wformat-security -Werror=format-security*

In CMake the same can be achieved by:
> set (CMAKE_C_FLAGS_INIT -Wformat -Wformat-security -Werror=format-security)

### Buffer Overflow Attack Mitigations

To illustrate the Buffer Overflow vulnerabilities, consider the following code sample. If the variable str string is too long, the function lacks any protection against a buffer overflow and an attacker could exploit this vulnerability.

>void foo(char* str)
>{
>char buffer[10];
>strcpy(buffer,str);
>}

To avoid this, you should use _FORTIFY_SOURCE to detect buffer overflows.
>-D_FORTIFY_SOURCE=2
> To fully use this defense, you must optimize your code with -02 or higher.

### PIC or PIE

Position-independent code (PIC) or position-independent executable (PIE) is a body of machine code that, being placed somewhere in the primary memory, executes properly regardless of its absolute address.

Position-independent code can be executed at any memory address without modification. This differs from absolute code, which must be loaded at a specific location to function correctly, and load-time locatable (LTL) code, in which a linker or program loader modifies a program before execution so it can be run only from a particular memory location.

#### Enabling PIC / PIE in CMake

PIC / PIE can be enabled via the CMake Variable: *CMAKE_POSITION_INDEPENDENT_CODE*.
> set(CMAKE_POSITION_INDEPENDENT_CODE ON).
>**WARNING:**
> Check if your CMake version has CMake issue #14983, if so you would have to add the following line:
>>set(CMAKE_EXE_LINKER_FLAGS "${CMAKE_EXE_LINKER_FLAGS} -pie")

### RELRO

Read-only relocations (RELRO) allow sections of an executable that need to be writable only while a program is loading to be marked read-only before the program starts.

#### Enabling RELRO in QCC [GCC]

RELRO can be enabled via the the Linker Flag: *relro*.
> add_link_options("LINKER : SHELL : -z relro")

### BIND_NOW

When used in combination with RELRO, BIND_NOW prevents the full global offset table (GOT) from being overwritten. 

#### Enabling BIND NOW in QCC [GCC]

BIND_NOW can be enabled via the the Linker Flag: *now*.
> add_link_options("LINKER : SHELL : -z now")

## QNX Kernel Features

### ASLR

Address Space Layout Randomization (ASLR) is a computer security technique which involves randomly positioning the base address of an executable and the position of libraries, heap, and stack, in a process's address space.

The random mixing of memory addresses performed by ASLR means that an attack no longer knows at what address the required code (such as functions or ROP gadgets) is actually located. That way, rather than removing vulnerabilities from the system, ASLR attempts to make it more challenging to exploit existing vulnerabilities

#### Enabling ASLR in QNX 7

Address Space Layout Randomisation (ASLR) can be enabled via the memory manager of procnto. ASLR can be enabled by passing –mr to procnto 

> procnto-smp-instr –mr

### Exectuable Space Protection [ESP] (or) Data Execution Prevention [DEP]

In computer security, executable-space protection marks memory regions as non-executable, such that an attempt to execute machine code in these regions will cause an exception. It makes use of hardware features such as the NX bit (no-execute bit), or in some cases software emulation of those features.

#### Enabling ESP (or) DEP in QNX

(QNX Neutrino 6.4.0 or later) Turn on (x) or off (~x) the PROT_EXEC flag for system-allocated threads. The x option allows gcc to generate code on the stack, which it does when taking the address of a nested function (a GCC extension). The ~x option increases security but disallows taking the address of nested functions; you can still do this on a case-by-case basis by doing an mprotect() call that turns on PROT_EXEC for the required stacks. The default is to turn on PROT_EXEC (x).

> procnto-smp-instr -m~x
